Adding Postgres DB migration guide (#183)
kiegroup/kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/persistence/postgresql-flyway-migration.adoc

= Migrating Your PostgreSQL Database with a Kogito upgrade
:flyway_install_url: https://flywaydb.org/download/community
:flyway_migrate_existing_url: https://flywaydb.org/documentation/learnmore/existing

> :kogito_ddl_script_url: https://repository.jboss.org/org/kie/kogito/kogito-ddl

Reviewer: we should provide links to Maven Central: https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/org/kie/kogito/kogito-ddl

:flyway_url: https://flywaydb.org/
:flyway_baseline_migration_url: https://documentation.red-gate.com/fd/baseline-migrations-184127465.html

Kogito provides an out-of-the-box way to manage your database schema changes with each upgrade. It uses link:{flyway_url}[Flyway] to achieve this functionality.

When you upgrade your Kogito version, by default it will pick up the latest changes available from Kogito and apply them automatically.

NOTE: This feature is currently available only for `kogito-addons-quarkus-persistence-postgresql` extension.

== How to migrate

=== Migrate using Flyway Config

> * Kogito provides a default mechanism for migrating your database while updating the Kogito version using the following `Flyway` properties (default value is `false`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Kogito provides a default mechanism for migrating your database while updating the Kogito version using the following `flyway` properties (default value is `false`):
```

Author: The technology name should start with capital case as suggested by @MarianMacik [here](https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-docs/pull/183#discussion_r958082930)

Reviewer: then do not use the ` 

```suggestion
* Kogito provides a default mechanism for migrating your database while updating the Kogito version using the following Flyway properties (default value is `false`):
```

+
--
[source,console]
----
$ flyway migrate -url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/foobardb -user=foo -password=bar
----
--
** Download the Kogito DDL zip from link:{kogito_ddl_script_url}[this link], choose the correct version,  extract the files and use the scripts from the `postgresql` folder.
** You can specify the location of the SQL files that need to be migrated using the `flyway.locations` option. For example,
+
--
[source,console]
----
flyway.locations=classpath:com.mycomp.migration,database/migrations,filesystem:/sql-migrations,s3:migrationsBucket,gcs:migrationsBucket
----
--

=== Manually executing scripts
You can use the provided SQL scripts in the zip file to migrate the database by executing them one by one.

* You can find the Kogito DDL scripts by visiting link:{kogito_ddl_script_url}[this link].
* Download the zip file of the scripts from the needed version for the Kogito upgrade.
* Extract the files.
* Execute the `sql` files from `postgresql` folder.
+
--
[source,console]
----
> psql -H host -U username -d database_name -a -f create_table.sql
----
--

> == Baseline migration
> In order to apply migrations to an existing schema. It is necessary to establish the baseline from where Flyway should start executing new migrations. That means, in case your schema already contains a structure and from now on, new changes provided by Kogito should be applied via Flyway integration. In Flyway terms, only migrations above `baselineVersion` will then be applied.
> Using below properties you can initialize flyway schema table.
> 
> === Baseline using Quarkus Configuration:
> --
> [source,console]
> ----
> quarkus.flyway.baseline-on-migrate=true
> quarkus.flyway.baseline-version=1.32.0
> ----
> --
> === Baseline using Flyway CLI:
> --
> [source,console]
> ----
> $ flyway -baselineOnMigrate="true" -baselineVersion="1.32.0" migrate
> ----
> --
> 
> For more details regarding Baseline migration, please visit the link:{flyway_baseline_migration_url}[Flyway Documentation].
> 
> NOTE: Be careful when enabling this feature as it removes the safety net which ensures that Flyway does not migrate the wrong database in case of a configuration mistake.
> 
> For more details regarding existing the Database setup, visit the link:{flyway_migrate_existing_url}[Flyway Documentation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Baseline migration

In order to apply migrations to an existing schema. It is necessary to establish the baseline from where Flyway should start executing new migrations. That means, in case your schema already contains a structure and from now on, new changes provided by Kogito should be applied via Flyway integration. In Flyway terms, only migrations above `baselineVersion` will then be applied.
Using below properties you can initialize flyway schema table.

WARNING: Be careful when enabling this feature as it removes the safety net which ensures that Flyway does not migrate the wrong database in case of a configuration mistake.

=== Baseline using Quarkus Configuration
--
[source,console]
----
quarkus.flyway.baseline-on-migrate=true
quarkus.flyway.baseline-version=1.32.0
----
--
=== Baseline using Flyway CLI
--
[source,console]
----
$ flyway -baselineOnMigrate="true" -baselineVersion="1.32.0" migrate
----
--

=== More details on Flyway migrations

* link:{flyway_baseline_migration_url}[Baseline Migrations Documentation].
* link:{flyway_migrate_existing_url}[Existing Database Setup Documentation].
```

+
--
[source,console]
----
$ flyway migrate -url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/foobardb -user=foo -password=bar
----
--
** Download the Kogito DDL zip from link:{kogito_ddl_script_url}[this link here] and extract it and use scripts from `postgresql` folder.
** You can specify the location of the SQL files that need to be migrated using the `flyway.locations` option. For example,
+
--
[source,console]
----
flyway.locations=classpath:com.mycomp.migration,database/migrations,filesystem:/sql-migrations,s3:migrationsBucket,gcs:migrationsBucket
----
--

=== Manually executing scripts
You can use the provided SQL scripts in zip to migrate the database by executing them one by one.

* You can find all Kogito DDL scripts by visiting link:{kogito_ddl_script_url}[this link here].
* Download the zip file of the scripts from version same as your Kogito upgrade.
* Extract the zip file.
* Execute the `sql` files from `postgresql` folder.

--
[source,console]
----
> psql -H host -U username -d database_name -a -f create_table.sql
----
--

== Baseline migration

> To automatically call baseline when migrate is executed against a non-empty schema with no metadata table, we can use the below property. This will baseline the schema with the baselineVersion before executing the migrations. Only migrations above baselineVersion will then be applied.

Reviewer 2: _In order to apply migrations to an existing schema. It's necessary to establish the `baseline` from where Flyway should start executing new migrations. That means, in case your schema already contains a structure and from now on, new changes provided by Kogito should be applied via Flyway integration. In Flyway terms, only migrations above `baselineVersion` will then be applied. 
@akumar074 @radtriste does that sounds better?
I think it should also show the actual value users should give for that property. @akumar074 I believe that should be `1.32.0` ?

Author: @cristianonicolai Thanks. This looks much better. I updated it with `baseline-version`.

[tabs]
====
Quarkus::
+
--
[source,console]
----
quarkus.flyway.baseline-on-migrate=true
----
--
Flyway CLI::
+
--
[source,console]
----
$ flyway -baselineOnMigrate="true" migrate
----
--
====

> For more details regarding Baseline migration, please see the link:{flyway_baseline_migration_url}[Flyway Documentation].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more details regarding Baseline migration, visit the link:{flyway_baseline_migration_url}[Flyway Documentation].
```

Reviewer 2: @akumar074 could you apply this one as well

= Migrating Your PostgreSQL Database with a Kogito upgrade
:flyway_install_url: https://flywaydb.org/download/community
:flyway_migrate_existing_url: https://flywaydb.org/documentation/learnmore/existing
:kogito_ddl_script_url: https://repository.jboss.org/org/kie/kogito/kogito-ddl
:flyway_url: https://flywaydb.org/
:flyway_baseline_migration_url: https://documentation.red-gate.com/fd/baseline-migrations-184127465.html

Kogito provides an out-of-the-box way to manage your database schema changes with each upgrade. It uses link:{flyway_url}[Flyway] to achieve this functionality.

When you upgrade your Kogito version, by default it will pick up the latest changes available from Kogito and apply them automatically.

> NOTE: This feature is currently available for only `kogito-addons-quarkus-persistence-postgresql` extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: This feature is currently available only for `kogito-addons-quarkus-persistence-postgresql` extension.
```

== How to migrate

=== Migrate using Flyway Config

* Kogito provides a default mechanism for migrating your database while updating the Kogito version using the following `Flyway` properties (default value is `false`):
+
--
[source,console]
----
quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start=true
----
--
This will create a schema history table `flyway_schema_history` in your database to track the version of each database, recording in it every versioned migration file applied to build that version.

=== Migrate using Flyway CLI
* If you want to migrate manually you can use the Flyway migration CLI tool.

** Download Flyway migration command-line tool from the link:{flyway_install_url}[Download Flyway Community Edition] link.
** Add the following properties in the `/conf/flyway.conf` file:
+
--
[source,console]
----
flyway.url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/foobardb
flyway.user=foo
flyway.password=bar
----
--
** You can specify these options with commands as well. The Flyway CLI will prompt for the username and password if they are missing in the configuration.
+
--
[source,console]
----
$ flyway migrate -url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/foobardb -user=foo -password=bar
----
--

> ** Download the Kogito DDL zip from link:{kogito_ddl_script_url}[this link here] and extract it and use scripts from `postgresql` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Download the Kogito DDL zip from link:{kogito_ddl_script_url}[this link], choose the correct version,  extract the files and use the scripts from the `postgresql` folder.
```

** You can specify the location of the SQL files that need to be migrated using the `flyway.locations` option. For example,
+
--
[source,console]
----
flyway.locations=classpath:com.mycomp.migration,database/migrations,filesystem:/sql-migrations,s3:migrationsBucket,gcs:migrationsBucket
----
--

=== Manually executing scripts

> You can use the provided SQL scripts in zip to migrate the database by executing them one by one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the provided SQL scripts in the zip file to migrate the database by executing them one by one.
```

> * You can find all Kogito DDL scripts by visiting link:{kogito_ddl_script_url}[this link here].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You can find the Kogito DDL scripts by visiting link:{kogito_ddl_script_url}[this link].
```

* Download the zip file of the scripts from version same as your Kogito upgrade.

> * Extract the zip file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Extract the files.
```

* Execute the `sql` files from `postgresql` folder.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

--
[source,console]
----
> psql -H host -U username -d database_name -a -f create_table.sql
----
--

== Baseline migration

> In order to apply migrations to an existing schema. It's necessary to establish the baseline from where Flyway should start executing new migrations. That means, in case your schema already contains a structure and from now on, new changes provided by Kogito should be applied via Flyway integration. In Flyway terms, only migrations above `baselineVersion` will then be applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to apply migrations to an existing schema. It is necessary to establish the baseline from where Flyway should start executing new migrations. That means, in case your schema already contains a structure and from now on, new changes provided by Kogito should be applied via Flyway integration. In Flyway terms, only migrations above `baselineVersion` will then be applied.
```

Using below properties you can initialize flyway schema table.

[tabs]
====
Quarkus::
+
--
[source,console]
----
quarkus.flyway.baseline-on-migrate=true
quarkus.flyway.baseline-version=1.32.0
----
--
Flyway CLI::
+
--
[source,console]
----
$ flyway -baselineOnMigrate="true" -baselineVersion="1.32.0" migrate
----
--

> ====

Reviewer: as you separated the 2 (quarkus and CLI) in the first section, you should adopt the same structure here and create 2 subsections.

Author: @radtriste Earlier we established the two ways we can migrate using the flyway. Here, we are providing just a configuration and how it can be used in both ways. I think it is more convenient to put them together under the same section.

Reviewer: My issue is that for quarkus it is a configuration to put and for CLI, it is a command... This could be confusing.
In the first section you separate into 2 subsections. I would do the same here to be logical

Author: @radtriste I've updated it.

> For more details regarding Baseline migration, please visit link:{flyway_baseline_migration_url}[Flyway Documentation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details regarding Baseline migration, please visit the link:{flyway_baseline_migration_url}[Flyway Documentation].
```

NOTE: Be careful when enabling this feature as it removes the safety net which ensures that Flyway does not migrate the wrong database in case of a configuration mistake.

> For more details regarding existing Database setup, visit link:{flyway_migrate_existing_url}[Flyway Documentation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details regarding existing the Database setup, visit the link:{flyway_migrate_existing_url}[Flyway Documentation].
```

> = Migrate Your Postgresql database with Kogito upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Migrate Your PostgreSQL database with a Kogito upgrade
```

> = Migrate Your Postgresql database with Kogito upgrade

Reviewer 3: If this is a procedure module then add gerund ( the ing form t the end of the verb). Just a suggestion. 
```suggestion
= Migrating Your Postgresql database with the Kogito upgrade
```

> Kogito provides out of the box way to manage your database schema changes with each upgrade. Kogito uses flyway to achieve the same functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kogito provides an out of the box way to manage your database schema changes with each upgrade. It uses flyway to achieve this functionality.
```

> Kogito provides out of the box way to manage your database schema changes with each upgrade. Kogito uses flyway to achieve the same functionality.

Reviewer 4: According to the Quarkus and Flyway sites, it should be written with a capital first letter.
```suggestion
Kogito provides out of the box way to manage your database schema changes with each upgrade. Kogito uses Flyway to achieve the same functionality.
```

When you upgrade your Kogito version, by default it will pick up the latest changes available from Kogito and apply them automatically.

== How to migrate

> .Ways to Migrate your Kogito database with Kogito and Flyway

Reviewer: I see 3 options to migrate the database, is that right ?
Can we separate them in 3 different subtitles, with explicit names, so they are also accessible via the right menu ?

> * Kogito provides a default mechanism for migrating your db while updating the kogito version using `quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start` (default `true`). This would create a schema history table `flyway_schema_history` in your DB to track the version of each database, recording in it every versioned migration file applied to build that version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Kogito provides a default mechanism for migrating your database while updating the Kogito version using the `quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start` property (default value is `true`). This would create a schema history table `flyway_schema_history` in your DB to track the version of each database, recording in it every versioned migration file applied to build that version.
```

> * Kogito provides a default mechanism for migrating your db while updating the kogito version using `quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start` (default `true`). This would create a schema history table `flyway_schema_history` in your DB to track the version of each database, recording in it every versioned migration file applied to build that version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Kogito provides a default mechanism for migrating your database while updating the kogito version using the `quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start` property (default value is `true`). This would create a schema history table `flyway_schema_history` in your database to track the version of each database, recording in it every versioned migration file applied to build that version. 
```

> * If you want to migrate manually you can use flyway migration CLI tool.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* If you want to migrate manually you can use the flyway migration CLI tool.
```

> ** Set the property `quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start` as `false`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** Set the `quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start` property as `false`.
```

> ** Download flyway migration command-line tool from link:https://flywaydb.org/download/community[here].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** Download the flyway migration CLI tool from the https://flywaydb.org/download/community[Download Flyway Community Edition] link.
```

> ** Add the following properties in the /conf/flyway.conf

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** Add the following properties in the `/conf/flyway.conf`.
```

+
--
[source,console]
----
flyway.url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/foobardb
flyway.user=foo
flyway.password=bar
----
--

> ** You can specify these options with commands as well. If flyway CLI will prompt for username and passwords if the missing in configuration.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
** You can specify these options with commands as well. Flyway CLI will prompt for username and passwords if it's missing in the configuration.
```

> ** You can specify these options with commands as well. If flyway CLI will prompt for username and passwords if the missing in configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** You can specify these options with commands as well. The flyway CLI will prompt for usernames and passwords if they are missing in the configuration.
```

+
--
[source,console]
----
$ flyway migrate -url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/foobardb -user=foo -password=bar
----
--

> ** You can specify location of sql files which needs to be migrated using the flyway.locations option. For example,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** You can specify the location of SQL files that need to be migrated using the `flyway.locations` option. For example,
```

+
--
[source,console]
----

> flyway.locations=classpath:com.mycomp.migration,database/migrations,filesystem:/sql-migrations,s3:migrationsBucket,gcs:migrationsBucket

Reviewer 4: This also belongs to the CLI migration path, right? For Quarkus way we should probably include it as `quarkus.flyway.locations`

Reviewer 2: @akumar074 I guess it should be mentioned here how to manually download the sql scripts. Link to artifact, so user can extract and apply the changes

= Migrating Your PostgreSQL Database with a Kogito upgrade
:flyway_install_url: https://flywaydb.org/download/community
:flyway_migrate_existing_url: https://flywaydb.org/documentation/learnmore/existing

> Kogito provides an out of the box way to manage your database schema changes with each upgrade. It uses Flyway to achieve this functionality.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kogito provides an out-of-the-box way to manage your database schema changes with each upgrade. It uses Flyway to achieve this functionality.
```

> Kogito provides an out-of-the-box way to manage your database schema changes with each upgrade. It uses Flyway to achieve this functionality.

Reviewer 2: maybe add the link to Flyway in here

When you upgrade your Kogito version, by default it will pick up the latest changes available from Kogito and apply them automatically.

== How to migrate

=== Migrate using Flyway Config

> * Kogito provides a default mechanism for migrating your database while updating the Kogito version using following `Flyway` properties (default value is `false`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Kogito provides a default mechanism for migrating your database while updating the Kogito version using the following `Flyway` properties (default value is `false`):
```

+
[tabs]
====
Quarkus::
+
--
`quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start=true`
--

> Spring Boot::

Reviewer 2: @akumar074 SB should probably not be mentioned here as it is not supported for SW

+
--
`spring.flyway.migrate-at-start=true`
--
====
This would create a schema history table `flyway_schema_history` in your DB to track the version of each database, recording in it every versioned migration file applied to build that version.

=== Migrate using Flyway CLI
* If you want to migrate manually you can use the Flyway migration CLI tool.

> ** Download flyway migration command-line tool from the link:{flyway_install_url}[Download Flyway Community Edition] link.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** Download Flyway migration command-line tool from the link:{flyway_install_url}[Download Flyway Community Edition] link.
```

> ** Add the following properties in the `/conf/flyway.conf`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** Add the following properties in the `/conf/flyway.conf` file:
```

+
--
[source,console]
----
flyway.url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/foobardb
flyway.user=foo
flyway.password=bar
----
--
** You can specify these options with commands as well. The Flyway CLI will prompt for the username and password if they are missing in the configuration.
+
--
[source,console]
----
$ flyway migrate -url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/foobardb -user=foo -password=bar
----
--

> ** You can specify location of the SQL files that need to be migrated using the `flyway.locations` option. For example,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** You can specify the location of the SQL files that need to be migrated using the `flyway.locations` option. For example,
```

+
--
[source,console]
----
flyway.locations=classpath:com.mycomp.migration,database/migrations,filesystem:/sql-migrations,s3:migrationsBucket,gcs:migrationsBucket
----
--

=== Manually executing scripts
You can use the provided SQL scripts in zip to migrate the database by executing them one by one.

--
[source,console]
----
> psql -H host -U username -d database_name -a -f create_table.sql
----
--

== Baseline migration
Whether to automatically call baseline when migrate is executed against a non-empty schema with no metadata table. This schema will then be baselined with the baselineVersion before executing the migrations. Only migrations above baselineVersion will then be applied.

[tabs]
====
Quarkus::
+
--
`quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start=true`
--

> Spring Boot::

Reviewer 2: No SB mention

+
--
`spring.flyway.migrate-at-start=true`
--
Flyway CLI::
+
--
`./flyway -baselineOnMigrate="true" migrate`
--
====

> NOTE: Be careful when enabling this as it removes the safety net that ensures Flyway does not migrate the wrong database in case of a configuration mistake!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: Be careful when enabling this as it removes the safety net that ensures Flyway does not migrate the wrong database in case of a configuration mistake.
```

+
--
[source,console]
----
$ flyway migrate -url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/foobardb -user=foo -password=bar
----
--
** Download the Kogito DDL zip from link:{kogito_ddl_script_url}[this link here] and extract it and use scripts from `postgresql` folder.
** You can specify the location of the SQL files that need to be migrated using the `flyway.locations` option. For example,
+
--
[source,console]
----
flyway.locations=classpath:com.mycomp.migration,database/migrations,filesystem:/sql-migrations,s3:migrationsBucket,gcs:migrationsBucket
----
--

=== Manually executing scripts
You can use the provided SQL scripts in zip to migrate the database by executing them one by one.

* You can find all Kogito DDL scripts by visiting link:{kogito_ddl_script_url}[this link here].
* Download the zip file of the scripts from version same as your Kogito upgrade.
* Extract the zip file.
* Execute the `sql` files from `postgresql` folder.

--
[source,console]
----
> psql -H host -U username -d database_name -a -f create_table.sql
----
--

== Baseline migration

> Whether to automatically call baseline when migrate is executed against a non-empty schema with no metadata table. This schema will then be baselined with the baselineVersion before executing the migrations. Only migrations above baselineVersion will then be applied.

Reviewer 2: @akumar074 perhaps link to https://documentation.red-gate.com/fd/baseline-migrations-184127465.html to give more context

> Whether to automatically call baseline when migrate is executed against a non-empty schema with no metadata table. This schema will then be baselined with the baselineVersion before executing the migrations. Only migrations above baselineVersion will then be applied.

Author: @radtriste @cristianonicolai If we want to Baseline our schema on migration against an existing DB without a flyway metadata table, we need to add this property. 
I have updated this part and added the link to docs.

[tabs]
====
Quarkus::
+
--
[source,console]
----
quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start=true
----
--
Flyway CLI::
+
--
[source,console]
----
$ flyway -baselineOnMigrate="true" migrate
----
--
====

> NOTE: Be careful when enabling this as it removes the safety net that ensures Flyway does not migrate the wrong database in case of a configuration mistake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Be careful when enabling this  feature as it removes the safety net which ensures that Flyway does not migrate the wrong database in case of a configuration mistake.
```

Author: Done!
